







Bravo Team: Detecting Future Criminals 
Luis Lopez
David Tiscareno
Cameron Pollard
Khoa Nguyen
DeVry University – LAS-432
Professor Cameron

April 20th 2014
 
Throughout the world, law enforcement’s main job is to protect the population from crime and to be the first line of the judicial system. By detecting the actions of future criminals the law enforcers can deter crime and protect the population from potential dangers. In today’s world, detecting criminal activity is already a large part of standard procedure for many agencies such as the FBI, the CIA, Interpol, and the British SIS also known as MI-6. They use such procedure to help fight the war on terror. There are ways to use the same technologies and techniques to help prevent crime with the use of “offender profiling” (Towl & Crighton, 1996). Scientists already have the ability to manipulate DNA and genes through in-vitro fertilization which allows a child acquire certain attributes and features that the scientists would want them to have. These practices open the door for questions about how agencies can use technology such as fMRI to map out the psyche of a person in order to determine if they possess similar psychological attributes to dangerous criminals (McAleer, 2010). At present, agencies do not choose to predict that a person is likely to commit a crime until it is known that they have a prior history of committing such crimes. However, once they are known to possess the traits that make them susceptible to be targeted as a future criminal, there is a possibility that technology can be used to either map out genetic information that can help identify individuals or apply biometric technologies that can help in identifying these individuals. The main issues that stands in the way are ethical dilemmas which can come up such as infringing the rights of freedom that have been bestowed upon us by our forefathers, and giving up our personal privacy in the name of protecting that freedom by allowing the government to profile our children in the early stages of life. In this paper we will be analyzing the problems and solutions related to the issue of detecting future criminals.
While there is both a moral and ethical dilemma concerning the detection of future criminals, the basis for why it is implemented is not. The issue at hand is a proper solution in which all can understand why such methods need to be implemented. The issue in question now is the inherent risk that is involved with this form of future detection. We have reached a point in our society where such questions need to be answered. Interestingly enough, "Scientific developments in both genetics and neuroscience may soon be able to identify children with a greatly increased risk of engaging in future violent activity" (Marchant, 2012). Scientists in the genetic field have discovered that mutations in the MAOA gene in a combination of an abusive upbringing leading to future antisocial and violent conduct, (Marchant, 2012). This proves that signs of future detection involving children can be accomplished, but leaving out any prior knowledge before birth. Red flags still exist with prior knowledge in detecting future criminals. Brain abnormality, called cavum spectum pellucidum, can be detected in the fetus which is associated with antisocial behavior. Critics of this form of biology-based approach acknowledge the fact that the environment in which the children grow up plays as crucial a role in deterring crime. Furthermore, it has been stated that "By favorably altering the environment of biologically predisposed children, we may be able to avoid the horrific outcomes that would otherwise result" (Marchant, 2012). While this form of technology and biology behind the idea of having a genetically predisposed position on the subject only exists after the child is born and years after their birth, the idea behind going further in the future and knowing how or what your child’s behavior will be in the future is still to be determined. The hope is to identify and successfully treat some at risk children predisposed to future criminal acts. In science there can often be a dilemma in the ethicality of the process you take to get the results you want. Even with all of the science and technology that is at our disposal, there is no clear answer to the avenue which should be taken in detecting future criminals. Detecting antisocial behavior genes in a fetus is one way, but there is not enough evidence to merit a policy change. The deterrence of crime is meant to establish guidelines for us to live in a civil society, creating an environment where the individual/criminal will pay for his or her actions. In determining criminal activity the issue has been brought up as to what lengths we would go to prevent future criminals before they commit the act. Being able to prove whether or not someone will become a criminal or commit criminal acts before birth is an inexact science. Is it truly plausible for anyone to determine whether someone would be a nuisance or a strain on society? The answer for the most part is “No.” Studies show that the majority of criminal activity is based on the person’s environment and the way in which they are brought up in life. Knowing whether or not it a child has a likeliness to commit crime is a different story. For example, if a family has a history of alcohol dependency, it would be easier to determine that the child will get these same traits. This only rings true if the child develops a dependency for alcohol at an early age. The same is true for crime, the environment that surrounds a child, including their upbringing, often has an effect on the way they live their life. People become a product of their environment, but their environment does not become a product of them. There is no scientific ways to prove whether an unborn child, a fetus, or a young infant will become a criminal in the future. When it comes to the ethical conundrum of gene markers in determining the potential for future criminals many questions arise. Could there have been something the parents could have done previously? If they knew what might have been with their child would they have had an abortion? What lengths would we go to screen embryos after conception? All of these factors can determine the outcome of the question, “What could have been?” Just as with genetic testing of infants with a family history of breast cancer, or the ability to become a star athlete, the same issue applies to genetic testing of future criminals. Debra Cohen dissects and asks the question in response to a book written by, Robert Klitzman called, "Am I My Genes? Confronting Fate and Family Secrets in the Age of Genetic Testing". Klitzman states that, "Science is giving us all this information" (Cohen, 2012). Klitzman then goes on to state "Genetics can offer tremendous good, potentially, but it can also be misused" (Cohen, 2012). This is where the morality and the ethical issues into this form of science can deter the public from support looking into potentially preventing future crimes from taking place. 
	Whether a child has certain traits which lead to crime is based solely on their upbringing and their surroundings. The claim is that violence is based on biology and that brain scans and tests of children at a certain age can receive treatment during their formative years to stop them from straying to crime (Taylor, 2011). Solutions to these questions on detecting future criminals rely on proper action taken by those who feel that there is a chance of future criminal behavior. This process affects not only the child, but the family as well. How can we as a society punish an individual for something that has not been done? Why have parental guidance for the child, seeing as how we already have their life mapped out for them (Taylor, 2011)?
The idea of detecting future criminals has been around for many years. Scientists from all around the world are trying to create new methods of preventing crimes before they happen. Many psychologically disturbed criminals have no idea they have a condition which compels them to behave negatively and engage in criminal behavior. Some of them have a mental illness at a young age, but they have ignored it. In most cases, when these people first find out they need medical attention like therapy or psychological evaluations, they do not get any type of treatment and fail to follow up with the process. There are so many cases of killing, shooting, or hurting someone by mentally unstable criminals such as the Tucson shooting back in 2011, when Scott Louis Patetti killed his in-law parents back in 1992, or Kelsey Patterson who randomly shot two people in 1992 (Bookman, 2013). They all have mental issues and get no attention from others until they committed crimes. 
The right to screen children’s brain and scan their genes for potential criminal activity remains a hotly debated subject. Some support it due to the fact that detecting future criminals can eliminate the problem before it actually happens. The idea behind screening children’s brains is to identify potential criminals and give them treatment while they are young to minimize the potential threat of crime. This is done by researching current criminals’ brain patterns and storing this data for future studies and for making decisions regarding current suspects. Dr. Kent Kiehl used the fMRI technology to detect common brain abnormalities of criminals and measured it to assess psychopathy (Brains On Trial, 2014). 
On the other hand, using the fMRI technology in criminal courts is still unreliable since it measures blood flow to the brain while a participant engages in a certain task (such as viewing a picture, or listening to words or phrases). However, it cannot tell how the person may have responded to these cues at the time of the crime (McAleer, 2010). The reason the fMRI report is not a reliable source is, because it does not show the person’s thought at the time the crime was committed. It cannot be used as evidence to support the person’s actions in court.
Many wonder if it would be more reliable to use the collected data from criminals to make decisions about children who have similar data. The government already tried to push the idea of testing six-year-old children across the country in the 1960s to find future criminals, but the bill did not go through due to the lack of sufficient predictive accuracy (Marchant, 2012). It would not be right to subject people to this kind of screening if the evidence does not support that the usage provides results. There are risks involved if the government tries to identify the children. The information on the database is collected from average criminals, which could lead to false positives. Also the environment in which someone is raised can determine their behavior, meaning that using this idea could indict the wrong person. That would hurt both the country and the family. The government might lose one of their good citizens and the family might lose one of their children just because the kid has a similar profile to criminals.
Additionally, what sort of treatment would be right for children at a young age for a crime they have not committed yet? They all have the right to practice freedom as normal citizens. Screening and labelling them as future criminals is not the right thing to do. If the government detects children with similar psychological data to that of a leader, artist, or genius, would the government treat them differently?  If this happens, the country will become a controlling, dictator nation since everyone will be treated differently based on their data. Citizens will never have their freedom since their futures were already appointed when they were kids.  The idea of detecting future criminals is a noble one but basing it on psychology is not the best way to determine someone’s future.
Additionally, there are many crimes which occur due to the intense hatred of the perpetrator against the victim, and their outward expressions of disgust could be indicative of criminal tendencies. Psychologist Edward Dunbar, PhD, explains, “These people are not psychotic, but they're consistently very troubled, very disturbed, very problematic members of our community who pose a huge risk for future violence” (DeAngelis, 2001). These are people who do not have a psychological disorder, but they set themselves apart with their outward expressions of hatred. Dunbar believes that their aggression makes them a large target for suspicion for future violent behavior. However, the question becomes: Is it right to look at these people with their aggressive behavior and bias and take action through technology described above to prevent them from committing future crimes? A government document by the National Center for Hate Crime Prevention mentions that one of their methods of hate crime prevention do target specific individuals with programs to encourage them to change their behavior (Wiley-Cordone). There are a number of people who will not change their ways from a small program. Furthermore, some of these people will continue their aggressive behavior, escalating to hate crimes. On one hand, taking drastic measures to ensure public safety from these biased aggressive individuals would be unjustly punishing those who would never commit a crime. On the other hand, failure to prevent future hate crimes will result in more victims of aggressive, biased criminal activity. Ultimately, punishing before the crime is committed is not a just reaction. Everyone has a choice, even if they spend most of their time online spreading hateful words. Acting on those words would be very different than just saying them.
There are many positive things that can come from detecting future criminals with the current technology available to us now. One key element in our current fight is the ability of the healthcare systems in partnership with the judicial system that can identify members of our population who pose a threat to themselves and others. This is already a form of detecting and deferring future criminals within our society although it does not use much technology that is available. The idea of profiling our children though fMRI technology and possibly genetic composition mapping at an early age is something that is feasible with the exemption that fMRI technology is not a sound and proven method to diagnose psychopathy. The second exemption to this idea is the fact that the population would not stand for allowing the government to infringe on the rights of the children and or population in question. A profiling method that is used to predict future criminal activity creates ethical dilemmas that our population is not prepared to allow. The key intolerable infringement would be the invasion of privacy by the government into the lives of families in the name of protecting the population from future criminals. We have seen similar examples of this with the current battles over gun rights and the government’s mandates over the population requiring registration of the firearms, firearms which would pose a threat to others although protected under the constitution of the United States. These battles over rights and safety seem to go on without a winner as the population is divided morally over the key topics of freedom in a country that is acclaimed to be “The Land of the Free” and that freedom protected from criminal activity within that same land of freedom and opportunity. Other methods in which we are we are clearly divided over is the genetic mapping of our children to outline their traits to see if they would pose a threat to others but these topics again pose ethical and moral dilemmas as it would go against privacy rights to label members of the population for pre-conditions and possible future actions which have not been committed. A solution such as this to detect future criminals would set us back in the fight over discrimination and would allow members of the world’s population to include our own to see us as taking steps in the same fashion in which Germany turned into Nazi Germany. In the end, it can be said that the use of technology to detect future criminals can provide ways and methods in which we can provide a safer environment for the population, although that safety would come at the high price of giving up many rights provided to us by the constitution of the United States of America. 
Bibliography
Bookman, M. (2013, December 12). 13 Men Condemned to Die Despite Severe Mental Illness. Retrieved from Mother Jones: http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2013/01/death-penalty-cases-mental-illness-clemency
Brains On Trial. (2014). FMRI. Retrieved from Brains On Trial: http://brainsontrial.com/tag/fmri/
Cohen, D. (2012, February). New Book Ponders Ethical Issues of Genetic Testing. Retrieved from MedicalXpress: http://medicalxpress.com/news/2012-02-ponders-ethical-issues-genetic.html
DeAngelis, T. (2001, November). Understanding and preventing hate crimes. Monitor on Psychology, p. 60.
Marchant, G. (2012, Oct. 17). Should We Screen Kids' Brains and Genes to ID Future Criminals? Retrieved from Slate: http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/future_tense/2012/10/should_kids_brains_and_genes_be_screened_to_detect_future_criminals.html
McAleer, K. (2010). The Brain of a Psychopath: Using fMRI Technology to Detect Brain Abnormalities, Part II. Retrieved from Psych Central: http://blogs.psychcentral.com/forensic-focus/2010/03/the-brain-of-a-psychopath-using-fmri-technology-to-detect-brain-abnormalities-part-ii/
Taylor, J. (2011, Feb. 22). Scan Children's Brain to Detect Potential Criminals. Retrieved from The Economic Voive: http://www.economicvoice.com/scan-childrens-brains-to-detect-potential-criminals/
Towl, G. J., & Crighton, D. A. (1996). The Handbook of Psychology for Forensic Practitioners. London, GBR: Routledge.
Wiley-Cordone, J. (n.d.). Healing the Hate: Innovations in Hate Crime Prevention. Retrieved April 4, 2014, from State of California Department of Justice - Office of the Attorney General: http://oag.ca.gov/sites/all/files/pdfs/civilrights/healing.pdf


